Adam Wespiser
Homework due June 5, 2013
See "wespiser_HW.R" for R code and a list of packages used...


1) IGV data. 
Using IGV to view the Broad's TCGA data, I have identified a potential CNV within glioblastoma cancers.  The region, as seen in Fig 1, contains both amplifications and deletions.  The ragged edges of the regions suggest this CNV is signal, and may very well be flanked by repeats or another type of structre that results in non-allelic homologous recombination. 

2) I ran the segmenter to compare to parameters, alpha value in Figure 2, and minimum width in Figure 3.  The higher values of alpha (0.5) results in a larger number of segment transitions than the alpha value of 0.01.  These additional segments tend to be small and interspersed within larger segments.  This is consistent with the greater acceptance of segmentation. The next comparison,Figure 3, contrasted the min.width parameter, which represents the number of of markers changed for a segment.  Although major segments remained the same between samples, there were slight differences between analysis groups.  Perhaps a larger alpha value than 0.01 would result in more differences. 

3) For the segmenter, I tried a couple different ways of picking thresholds.  The first used the genome singal density, Figure 4, to establish thresholds then apply them to a segmenter with window size=100, Figure 5.  I worked with a few different window sizes, and experimented with mean and median, but ultimately choose 100 for a window size subjectively on the belief it was the most concise signal without averaging over potential duplications or delettions, Figure 7 & 8. My first attempt to automatically assign groups used Tukey's 5 statistics, the upper and lower shoulder, to select the thresholds, Figure 6, This did not work out very well.  My next idea was to train a guassian mixture model to the signal data, then assign each averaged point to the most likely guassian.  I trained the model with a variable number of guassian distributions(between 2 and 6, and the model returned 5 clusters with a likelihood of 131565.3027. (Figure 9). The guassian model can potentially distinguish multiple level of dulpication and deletion, however, this comes at the cost of potentially assigning two distributions very close to eachother.  This appears to be the case in figure 9, with the last major segment jittering between two segmentation values. Comparing to the segmenter R function from the DNAcopy Library, Figure 10, the guassian threshold model has less segments, and more noise. If I were to continue this line of research, I would strictly use the moving average algorithm with a gussian model trained for 3 cases, no change, duplication, and deletion.   I think looking at some other distributions, including lognormal, may also be of benefit.    
